1. Front Psychol. 2016 May 10;7:578. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00578. eCollection
2016.

Mindful Reading: Mindfulness Meditation Helps Keep Readers with Dyslexia and ADHD
on the Lexical Track.

Tarrasch R(1), Berman Z(2), Friedmann N(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Education and Sagol School of Neuroscience, Tel Aviv University Tel 
Aviv, Israel. (2)School of Psychology, Tel Aviv University Tel Aviv, Israel.

This study explored the effects of a Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction (MBSR)
intervention on reading, attention, and psychological well-being among people
with developmental dyslexia and/or attention deficits. Various types of dyslexia 
exist, characterized by different error types. We examined a question that has
not been tested so far: which types of errors (and dyslexias) are affected by
MBSR training. To do so, we tested, using an extensive battery of reading tests, 
whether each participant had dyslexia, and which errors types s/he makes, and
then compared the rate of each error type before and after the MBSR workshop. We 
used a similar approach to attention disorders: we evaluated the participants'
sustained, selective, executive, and orienting of attention to assess whether
they had attention-disorders, and if so, which functions were impaired. We then
evaluated the effect of MBSR on each of the attention functions. Psychological
measures including mindfulness, stress, reflection and rumination,
lifesatisfaction, depression, anxiety, and sleep-disturbances were also
evaluated. Nineteen Hebrew-readers completed a 2-month mindfulness workshop. The 
results showed that whereas reading errors of letter-migrations within and
between words and vowelletter errors did not decrease following the workshop,
most participants made fewer reading errors in general following the workshop,
with a significant reduction of 19% from their original number of errors. This
decrease mainly resulted from a decrease in errors that occur due to reading via 
the sublexical rather than the lexical route. It seems, therefore, that
mindfulness helped reading by keeping the readers on the lexical route. This
improvement in reading probably resulted from improved sustained attention: the
reduction in sublexical reading was significant for the dyslexic participants who
also had attention deficits, and there were significant correlations between
reduced reading errors and decreases in impulsivity. Following the meditation
workshop, the rate of commission errors decreased, indicating decreased
impulsivity, and the variation in RTs in the CPT task decreased, indicating
improved sustained attention. Significant improvements were obtained in
participants' mindfulness, perceived-stress, rumination, depression,
state-anxiety, and sleep-disturbances. Correlations were also obtained between
reading improvement and increased mindfulness following the workshop. Thus,
whereas mindfulness training did not affect specific types of errors and did not 
improve dyslexia, it did affect the reading of adults with developmental dyslexia
and ADHD, by helping them to stay on the straight path of the lexical route while
reading. Thus, the reading improvement induced by mindfulness sheds light on the 
intricate relation between attention and reading. Mindfulness reduced impulsivity
and improved sustained attention, and this, in turn, improved reading of adults
with developmental dyslexia and ADHD, by helping them to read via the straight
path of the lexical route.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00578 
PMCID: PMC4862243
PMID: 27242565  [PubMed]


2. Neural Plast. 2016;2016:9504642. doi: 10.1155/2016/9504642. Epub 2016 Feb 21.

State and Training Effects of Mindfulness Meditation on Brain Networks Reflect
Neuronal Mechanisms of Its Antidepressant Effect.

Yang CC(1), Barrós-Loscertales A(2), Pinazo D(3), Ventura-Campos N(4), Borchardt 
V(5), Bustamante JC(6), Rodríguez-Pujadas A(2), Fuentes-Claramonte P(2), Balaguer
R(3), Ávila C(2), Walter M(7).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Psicología Básica, Clínica y Psicobiología, Universitat Jaume 
I, 12071 Castellón, Spain; Clinical Affective Neuroimaging Laboratory, 39120
Magdeburg, Germany; Department of Behavioral Neurology, Leibniz Institute for
Neurobiology, 39118 Magdeburg, Germany. (2)Departamento de Psicología Básica,
Clínica y Psicobiología, Universitat Jaume I, 12071 Castellón, Spain.
(3)Departamento de Psicología Evolutiva, Educativa, Social y Metodología,
Universitat Jaume I, 12071 Castellón, Spain. (4)Departamento de Psicología
Básica, Clínica y Psicobiología, Universitat Jaume I, 12071 Castellón, Spain;
Departamento de Didáctica de la Matemática, Facultad de Magisterio de la
Universidad de Valencia, 46022 Valencia, Spain. (5)Clinical Affective
Neuroimaging Laboratory, 39120 Magdeburg, Germany; Department of Behavioral
Neurology, Leibniz Institute for Neurobiology, 39118 Magdeburg, Germany.
(6)Departamento de Psicologia y Sociologia, Universidad de Zaragoza, 50009
Zaragoza, Spain. (7)Clinical Affective Neuroimaging Laboratory, 39120 Magdeburg, 
Germany; Department of Behavioral Neurology, Leibniz Institute for Neurobiology, 
39118 Magdeburg, Germany; Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy,
Otto-von-Guericke University, 39120 Magdeburg, Germany; Center for Behavioral
Brain Sciences (CBBS), 39120 Magdeburg, Germany; Department of Psychiatry and
Psychotherapy, Eberhard Karls University, 72076 Tuebingen, Germany.

The topic of investigating how mindfulness meditation training can have
antidepressant effects via plastic changes in both resting state and meditation
state brain activity is important in the rapidly emerging field of
neuroplasticity. In the present study, we used a longitudinal design
investigating resting state fMRI both before and after 40 days of meditation
training in 13 novices. After training, we compared differences in network
connectivity between rest and meditation using common resting state functional
connectivity methods. Interregional methods were paired with local measures such 
as Regional Homogeneity. As expected, significant differences in functional
connectivity both between states (rest versus meditation) and between time points
(before versus after training) were observed. During meditation, the internal
consistency in the precuneus and the temporoparietal junction increased, while
the internal consistency of frontal brain regions decreased. A follow-up analysis
of regional connectivity of the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex further revealed
reduced connectivity with anterior insula during meditation. After meditation
training, reduced resting state functional connectivity between the pregenual
anterior cingulate and dorsal medical prefrontal cortex was observed. Most
importantly, significantly reduced depression/anxiety scores were observed after 
training. Hence, these findings suggest that mindfulness meditation might be of
therapeutic use by inducing plasticity related network changes altering the
neuronal basis of affective disorders such as depression.

DOI: 10.1155/2016/9504642 
PMCID: PMC4779536
PMID: 26998365  [PubMed - in process]


3. Appl Psychophysiol Biofeedback. 2015 Dec;40(4):257-68. doi:
10.1007/s10484-015-9293-x.

Physical activity, mindfulness meditation, or heart rate variability biofeedback 
for stress reduction: a randomized controlled trial.

van der Zwan JE(1,)(2), de Vente W(3,)(4), Huizink AC(5), Bögels SM(3,)(4), de
Bruin EI(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Psychology and EMGO Institute for Health and Care 
Research, VU University Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
j.e.vander.zwan@vu.nl. (2)Department of Developmental Psychology, Faculty of
Psychology and Education, VU University Amsterdam, Van Der Boechorststraat 1,
1081 BT, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. j.e.vander.zwan@vu.nl. (3)Research Institute
of Child Development and Education, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. (4)Research Priority Area Yield, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands. (5)Department of Developmental Psychology and EMGO Institute for
Health and Care Research, VU University Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

In contemporary western societies stress is highly prevalent, therefore the need 
for stress-reducing methods is great. This randomized controlled trial compared
the efficacy of self-help physical activity (PA), mindfulness meditation (MM),
and heart rate variability biofeedback (HRV-BF) in reducing stress and its
related symptoms. We randomly allocated 126 participants to PA, MM, or HRV-BF
upon enrollment, of whom 76 agreed to participate. The interventions consisted of
psycho-education and an introduction to the specific intervention techniques and 
5 weeks of daily exercises at home. The PA exercises consisted of a
vigorous-intensity activity of free choice. The MM exercises consisted of guided 
mindfulness meditation. The HRV-BF exercises consisted of slow breathing with a
heart rate variability biofeedback device. Participants received daily reminders 
for their exercises and were contacted weekly to monitor their progress. They
completed questionnaires prior to, directly after, and 6 weeks after the
intervention. Results indicated an overall beneficial effect consisting of
reduced stress, anxiety and depressive symptoms, and improved psychological
well-being and sleep quality. No significant between-intervention effect was
found, suggesting that PA, MM, and HRV-BF are equally effective in reducing
stress and its related symptoms. These self-help interventions provide easily
accessible help for people with stress complaints.

DOI: 10.1007/s10484-015-9293-x 
PMCID: PMC4648965
PMID: 26111942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. JAMA Intern Med. 2015 Apr;175(4):494-501. doi: 10.1001/jamainternmed.2014.8081.

Mindfulness meditation and improvement in sleep quality and daytime impairment
among older adults with sleep disturbances: a randomized clinical trial.

Black DS(1), O'Reilly GA(1), Olmstead R(2), Breen EC(2), Irwin MR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles. (2)Cousins Center for Psychoneuroimmunology,
Semel Institute for Neuroscience, Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral
Sciences, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, University of California, Los 
Angeles.

Comment in
    Praxis (Bern 1994). 2015 May 20;104(11):591-2.
    JAMA Intern Med. 2015 Apr;175(4):502-3.

IMPORTANCE: Sleep disturbances are most prevalent among older adults and often go
untreated. Treatment options for sleep disturbances remain limited, and there is 
a need for community-accessible programs that can improve sleep.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the efficacy of a mind-body medicine intervention, called
mindfulness meditation, to promote sleep quality in older adults with moderate
sleep disturbances.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Randomized clinical trial with 2 parallel
groups conducted from January 1 to December 31, 2012, at a medical research
center among an older adult sample (mean [SD] age, 66.3 [7.4] years) with
moderate sleep disturbances (Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index [PSQI] >5).
INTERVENTIONS: A standardized mindful awareness practices (MAPs) intervention (n 
= 24) or a sleep hygiene education (SHE) intervention (n = 25) was randomized to 
participants, who received a 6-week intervention (2 hours per week) with assigned
homework.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The study was powered to detect between-group
differences in moderate sleep disturbance measured via the PSQI at
postintervention. Secondary outcomes pertained to sleep-related daytime
impairment and included validated measures of insomnia symptoms, depression,
anxiety, stress, and fatigue, as well as inflammatory signaling via nuclear
factor (NF)-κB.
RESULTS: Using an intent-to-treat analysis, participants in the MAPs group showed
significant improvement relative to those in the SHE group on the PSQI. With the 
MAPs intervention, the mean (SD) PSQIs were 10.2 (1.7) at baseline and 7.4 (1.9) 
at postintervention. With the SHE intervention, the mean (SD) PSQIs were 10.2
(1.8) at baseline and 9.1 (2.0) at postintervention. The between-group mean
difference was 1.8 (95% CI, 0.6-2.9), with an effect size of 0.89. The MAPs group
showed significant improvement relative to the SHE group on secondary health
outcomes of insomnia symptoms, depression symptoms, fatigue interference, and
fatigue severity (P < .05 for all). Between-group differences were not observed
for anxiety, stress, or NF-κB, although NF-κB concentrations significantly
declined over time in both groups (P < .05).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: The use of a community-accessible MAPs intervention
resulted in improvements in sleep quality at immediate postintervention, which
was superior to a highly structured SHE intervention. Formalized
mindfulness-based interventions have clinical importance by possibly serving to
remediate sleep problems among older adults in the short term, and this effect
appears to carry over into reducing sleep-related daytime impairment that has
implications for quality of life.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT01534338.

DOI: 10.1001/jamainternmed.2014.8081 
PMCID: PMC4407465
PMID: 25686304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Pain Med. 2015 Apr;16(4):641-52. doi: 10.1111/pme.12605. Epub 2014 Nov 7.

Effects of mindfulness meditation on chronic pain: a randomized controlled trial.

la Cour P(1), Petersen M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Functional Diseases, Mental Health Center, Copenhagen
Multidisciplinary Pain Center, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.

OBJECTIVE: This randomized controlled clinical trial investigated the effects of 
mindfulness meditation on chronic pain.
DESIGN: A total of 109 patients with nonspecific chronic pain were randomized to 
either a standardized mindfulness meditation program (mindfulness-based stress
reduction [MBSR]) or to a wait list control.
METHODS: Pain, physical function, mental function, pain acceptance, and
health-related quality of life were measured. The SF36 vitality scale was chosen 
as the primary outcome measure; the primary end point was after completing the
MBSR course. Within a 2.5-year period, 43 of the 109 randomized patients
completed the mindfulness program, while 47 remained in the control group. Data
were compared at three time points: at baseline, after completion of the
course/waiting period, and at the 6-month follow-up.
RESULTS: Significant effect (Cohen's d = 0.39) was found on the primary outcome
measure, the SF36 vitality scale. On the secondary variables, significant medium 
to large size effects (Cohen's d = 0.37-0.71) were found for lower general
anxiety and depression, better mental quality of life (psychological well-being),
feeling in control of the pain, and higher pain acceptance. Small
(nonsignificant) effect sizes were found for pain measures. There were no
significant differences in the measures just after the intervention vs the
6-month follow-up.
CONCLUSION: A standardized mindfulness program (MBSR) contributes positively to
pain management and can exert clinically relevant effects on several important
dimensions in patients with long-lasting chronic pain.

© 2014 American Academy of Pain Medicine.

DOI: 10.1111/pme.12605 
PMID: 25376753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Int J Organ Transplant Med. 2014;5(2):50-6.

Reducing stress and anxiety in caregivers of lung transplant patients: benefits
of mindfulness meditation.

Haines J(1), Spadaro KC(2), Choi J(1), Hoffman LA(1), Blazeck AM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Acute/Tertiary Care, School of Nursing, University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, USA. (2)School of Nursing, Chatham University,
Pittsburgh, USA.

BACKGROUND: Caregivers are a vital resource in the care of transplant candidates 
or recipients. However, few strategies have been tested that attempt to decrease 
the stress and anxiety they commonly encounter.
OBJECTIVE: To test the feasibility of using mindfulness-based stress reduction
(MBSR) techniques to decrease stress and anxiety in caregivers of lung transplant
candidates/recipients who required admission to an acute care facility.
METHODS: 30 caregivers of lung transplant candidates/recipients were recruited
during hospitalization of their significant other. Each completed the perceived
stress scale (PSS) and state trait anxiety inventory (STAI) before and 4 weeks
after receiving a DVD that demonstrated MBSR techniques. Participants were asked 
to practice MBSR techniques for 5-15 min a day for 4 weeks.
RESULTS: The participants had a mean±SD age of 55.6±13.6 years; 77% of
participants were female and 93% Caucasian. The mean PSS and STAI (trait and
anxiety) scores of caregivers were higher than population norms pre- and
post-intervention. Scores for caregivers who stated they watched the entire DVD
and practiced MBSR techniques as requested (n=15) decreased significantly from
pre- to post-testing for perceived stress (p=0.001), state anxiety (p=0.003) and 
trait anxiety (p=0.006). Scores for those who watched some or none of the DVD
(n=15) did not change significantly.
CONCLUSION: Caregivers can benefit from stress reduction techniques using MBSR.


PMCID: PMC4089339
PMID: 25013679  [PubMed]


7. J Sch Psychol. 2014 Jun;52(3):263-78. doi: 10.1016/j.jsp.2014.03.002. Epub 2014
Apr 27.

A randomized controlled pilot trial of classroom-based mindfulness meditation
compared to an active control condition in sixth-grade children.

Britton WB(1), Lepp NE(2), Niles HF(3), Rocha T(4), Fisher NE(5), Gold JS(6).

Author information: 
(1)Brown University Contemplative Studies Initiative, USA; Department of
Psychiatry and Human Behavior, Brown University Medical School, USA. Electronic
address: Willoughby_Britton@Brown.edu. (2)Brown University Contemplative Studies 
Initiative, USA. (3)Brown University Contemplative Studies Initiative, USA;
Benson-Henry Institute for Mind Body Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital,
USA. (4)Brown University Contemplative Studies Initiative, USA; Mind & Life
Institute, USA. (5)Brown University Contemplative Studies Initiative, USA;
Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, Brown University Medical School,
USA. (6)Brown University Contemplative Studies Initiative, USA; Moses Brown
School, USA.

The current study is a pilot trial to examine the effects of a nonelective,
classroom-based, teacher-implemented, mindfulness meditation intervention on
standard clinical measures of mental health and affect in middle school children.
A total of 101 healthy sixth-grade students (55 boys, 46 girls) were randomized
to either an Asian history course with daily mindfulness meditation practice
(intervention group) or an African history course with a matched experiential
activity (active control group). Self-reported measures included the Youth Self
Report (YSR), a modified Spielberger State-Trait Anxiety Inventory, and the
Cognitive and Affective Mindfulness Measure -Revised. Both groups decreased
significantly on clinical syndrome subscales and affect but did not differ in the
extent of their improvements. Meditators were significantly less likely to
develop suicidal ideation or thoughts of self-harm than controls. These results
suggest that mindfulness training may yield both unique and non-specific benefits
that are shared by other novel activities.

Copyright © 2014 Society for the Study of School Psychology. Published by
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jsp.2014.03.002 
PMCID: PMC4060047
PMID: 24930819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci. 2014 Jun;9(6):751-9. doi: 10.1093/scan/nst041. Epub
2013 Apr 24.

Neural correlates of mindfulness meditation-related anxiety relief.

Zeidan F(1), Martucci KT(2), Kraft RA(2), McHaffie JG(2), Coghill RC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, Wake Forest School of Medicine,
Medical Center Boulevard, Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA and Department of
Biomedical Engineering, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Medical Center Boulevard,
Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA fzeidan@wakehealth.edu. (2)Department of
Neurobiology and Anatomy, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Medical Center
Boulevard, Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA and Department of Biomedical Engineering,
Wake Forest School of Medicine, Medical Center Boulevard, Winston-Salem, NC
27157, USA.

Anxiety is the cognitive state related to the inability to control emotional
responses to perceived threats. Anxiety is inversely related to brain activity
associated with the cognitive regulation of emotions. Mindfulness meditation has 
been found to regulate anxiety. However, the brain mechanisms involved in
meditation-related anxiety relief are largely unknown. We employed pulsed
arterial spin labeling MRI to compare the effects of distraction in the form of
attending to the breath (ATB; before meditation training) to mindfulness
meditation (after meditation training) on state anxiety across the same subjects.
Fifteen healthy subjects, with no prior meditation experience, participated in 4 
d of mindfulness meditation training. ATB did not reduce state anxiety, but state
anxiety was significantly reduced in every session that subjects meditated.
Meditation-related anxiety relief was associated with activation of the anterior 
cingulate cortex, ventromedial prefrontal cortex and anterior insula.
Meditation-related activation in these regions exhibited a strong relationship to
anxiety relief when compared to ATB. During meditation, those who exhibited
greater default-related activity (i.e. posterior cingulate cortex) reported
greater anxiety, possibly reflecting an inability to control self-referential
thoughts. These findings provide evidence that mindfulness meditation attenuates 
anxiety through mechanisms involved in the regulation of self-referential thought
processes.

© The Author (2013). Published by Oxford University Press. For Permissions,
please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/scan/nst041 
PMCID: PMC4040088
PMID: 23615765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Clin Psychiatry. 2013 Aug;74(8):786-92. doi: 10.4088/JCP.12m08083.

Randomized controlled trial of mindfulness meditation for generalized anxiety
disorder: effects on anxiety and stress reactivity.

Hoge EA(1), Bui E, Marques L, Metcalf CA, Morris LK, Robinaugh DJ, Worthington
JJ, Pollack MH, Simon NM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Anxiety and Traumatic Stress Disorders, Massachusetts General
Hospital, One Bowdoin Sq, 6th Floor, Boston, MA 02114 ehoge@partners.org.

OBJECTIVE: Mindfulness meditation has met increasing interest as a therapeutic
strategy for anxiety disorders, but prior studies have been limited by
methodological concerns, including a lack of an active comparison group. This is 
the first randomized, controlled trial comparing the manualized Mindfulness-Based
Stress Reduction (MBSR) program with an active control for generalized anxiety
disorder (GAD), a disorder characterized by chronic worry and physiologic
hyperarousal symptoms.
METHOD: Ninety-three individuals with DSM-IV-diagnosed GAD were randomly assigned
to an 8-week group intervention with MBSR or to an attention control, Stress
Management Education (SME), between 2009 and 2011. Anxiety symptoms were measured
with the Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale (HAMA; primary outcome measure), the
Clinical Global Impressions-Severity of Illness and -Improvement scales (CGI-S
and CGI-I), and the Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI). Stress reactivity was assessed 
by comparing anxiety and distress during pretreatment and posttreatment
administration of the Trier Social Stress Test (TSST).
RESULTS: A modified intent-to-treat analysis including participants who completed
at least 1 session of MBSR (n = 48) or SME (n = 41) showed that both
interventions led to significant (P < .0001) reductions in HAMA scores at
endpoint, but did not significantly differ. MBSR, however, was associated with a 
significantly greater reduction in anxiety as measured by the CGI-S, the CGI-I,
and the BAI (all P values < .05). MBSR was also associated with greater
reductions than SME in anxiety and distress ratings in response to the TSST
stress challenge (P < .05) and a greater increase in positive self-statements (P 
= .004).
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that MBSR may have a beneficial effect on
anxiety symptoms in GAD and may also improve stress reactivity and coping as
measured in a laboratory stress challenge.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT01033851.

© Copyright 2013 Physicians Postgraduate Press, Inc.

DOI: 10.4088/JCP.12m08083 
PMCID: PMC3772979
PMID: 23541163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Psychol Res Behav Manag. 2012;5:131-41. doi: 10.2147/PRBM.S34937. Epub 2012 Nov
23.

An update on mindfulness meditation as a self-help treatment for anxiety and
depression.

Edenfield TM(1), Saeed SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatric Medicine, Brody School of Medicine at East Carolina 
University, Greenville, NC, USA.

In recent years, complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) treatments have
increased in popularity. This is especially true for treatments that are related 
to exercise and mindfulness-based interventions (MBIs) in the treatment of both
mental and physical illness. MBIs, such as Mindfulness-based Cognitive Therapy
(MBCT) and Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction (MBSR), which are derived from
ancient Buddhist and Yoga philosophies, have become popular treatments in
contemporary psychotherapy. While there is growing evidence that supports the
role of these interventions in relapse prevention, little is known about the role
that MBIs play in the treatment of acute symptoms of depression and anxiety. Even
less is known about the importance of specific components of MBIs (eg,
mindfulness meditation [MM]) and the overall impact that these interventions have
on the experience or expression of psychological distress. Moreover, few studies 
have rigorously evaluated the dose-response relationship that is required to
effect positive symptom change and the mechanisms of change that are responsible 
for observed improvements. This review will define meditation and mindfulness,
discuss the relationship between stress and health and how MM relates to
therapeutically engaging the relaxation response, and review the empirical
findings that are related to the efficacy of MM in the treatment of depression
and anxiety symptoms. Given the paucity of research that examines the
applications of these treatments in clinical populations, the limitations of
applying these findings to clinical samples will be mentioned. A brief review of 
the issues related to the possible mechanisms of change and the dose-response
relationship regarding MBIs, particularly MM, will be provided. Finally,
limitations of the extant literature and future directions for further
exploration of this topic will be offered.

DOI: 10.2147/PRBM.S34937 
PMCID: PMC3500142
PMID: 23175619  [PubMed]


11. Aten Primaria. 2010 Nov;42(11):564-70. doi: 10.1016/j.aprim.2009.10.020. Epub
2010 Feb 2.

[Reducing stress levels and anxiety in primary-care physicians through training
and practice of a mindfulness meditation technique].

[Article in Spanish]

Franco Justo C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Psicología Evolutiva y de la Educación, Universidad de
Almería, Almería, Spain. cfranco@ual.es

PURPOSE: To check the effectiveness of a mindfulness development meditation
technique on stress and anxiety in a group of primary-care physicians.
DESIGN: Quasi-experimental with pretest/posttest/follow-up measurements in a
control group and an experimental group. SITE: University of Almeria.
PARTICIPANTS: 38 primary-care physicians enrolled in a Teaching Aptitude Course
(CAP).
INTERVENTION: An experimental group and a control group were formed with 19
participants in each. The experimental group took a psycho-educational meditation
program for training and practice in mindfulness.
MEASUREMENT: The Perceived Stress Scale (PSS), the Strain Questionnaire and the
State-Trait Anxiety Questionnaire were used to measure stress and anxiety levels.
RESULTS: A comparative statistical analysis was performed using the Mann-Whitney 
non-parametric U test, finding a significant reduction in all the primary-care
physician stress and anxiety variables in the experimental group compared to the 
control group in pretest-posttest and follow-up tests.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study support the effectiveness of mindfulness
development meditation techniques in decreasing stress and anxiety in
primary-care physicians. Nevertheless, the study shows various limitations that
would have to be corrected in successive studies to bring more validity to the
results.

Copyright © 2009 Elsevier España, S.L. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.aprim.2009.10.020 
PMID: 20129713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Cogn Psychother. 2009 Aug;23(3):242-257.

Mindfulness Meditation Training and Self-Referential Processing in Social Anxiety
Disorder: Behavioral and Neural Effects.

Goldin P(1), Ramel W(1), Gross J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Stanford University.

This study examined the effects of mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR) on
the brain-behavior mechanisms of self-referential processing in patients with
social anxiety disorder (SAD). Sixteen patients underwent functional magnetic
resonance imaging while encoding self-referential, valence, and orthographic
features of social trait adjectives. Post-MBSR, 14 patients completed
neuroimaging. Compared to baseline, MBSR completers showed (a) increased
self-esteem and decreased anxiety, (b) increased positive and decreased negative 
self-endorsement, (c) increased activity in a brain network related to attention 
regulation, and (d) reduced activity in brain systems implicated in
conceptual-linguistic self-view. MBSR-related changes in maladaptive or distorted
social self-view in adults diagnosed with SAD may be related to modulation of
conceptual self-processing and attention regulation. Self-referential processing 
may serve as a functional biobehavioral target to measure the effects of
mindfulness training.

DOI: 10.1891/0889-8391.23.3.242 
PMCID: PMC4283801
PMID: 25568592  [PubMed]


13. Clin Trials. 2009 Feb;6(1):76-89. doi: 10.1177/1740774508100982.

Mindfulness meditation training to reduce symptom distress in transplant
patients: rationale, design, and experience with a recycled waitlist.

Gross CR(1), Kreitzer MJ, Reilly-Spong M, Winbush NY, Schomaker EK, Thomas W.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology, College of Pharmacy,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis 55455, USA. gross002@umn.edu.

BACKGROUND: Solid organ transplant recipients must take immune suppressive
medications that have side effects, cause complications, and lead to distressing 
symptoms that reduce health-related quality of life (QOL). Mindfulness meditation
has been shown to reduce these symptoms in other patient populations, and it is
unlikely to interfere with the immune suppressive medication regimen.
PURPOSE: This article describes the design and rationale of a clinical trial to
determine whether training in mindfulness meditation can reduce depression,
anxiety and insomnia after transplantation, and summarizes baseline
characteristics of the participants.
METHODS: Transplant recipients were randomized in equal numbers to one of three
arms: a Mindfulness-based Stress Reduction (MBSR) program consisting of 8 weeks
of group instruction, home practice and telephone monitoring; a time and
attention control Health Education program; or a waitlist arm. After serving 6
months as waitlist controls, these participants were re-randomized to MBSR or
Health Education. Evaluations were obtained at baseline (prior to the active
interventions), 8 weeks, 6 months, and 1 year (after randomization to MBSR or
Health Education only). The primary analysis will compare composite symptom
scores between MBSR and Health Education, initially or after serving in the
waitlist. Subsequent analyses will compare these two groups on depression,
anxiety, and insomnia symptom scales and secondary outcomes of health-related
QOL, actigraphy, and health care utilization. A separate analysis, using only
data collected before re-randomization, will compare short-term outcomes between 
the waitlist and active treatment arms.
RESULTS: One hundred fifty recipients were randomized and 72% of waitlist
participants (31/43) were recycled to an active intervention after 6 months.
Patient characteristics were balanced across trial arms after initial and
secondary randomizations.
LIMITATIONS: Transplant recipients are a very select population. Their adherence 
to the intervention and willingness to serve as waitlist controls prior to
re-randomization may be atypical. Participants were not blinded to treatment and 
primary outcomes are self-reports.
CONCLUSION: The innovative design used in the trial enabled the waitlist group to
directly contribute to the number in the primary analysis of active arms, and to 
also serve as an internal validation test. The trial may be a useful model for
trials involving very small target populations.

DOI: 10.1177/1740774508100982 
PMCID: PMC2818773
PMID: 19254938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Addict Med. 2008 Sep;2(3):165-73. doi: 10.1097/ADM.0b013e31816f8546.

Mindfulness meditation for alcohol relapse prevention: a feasibility pilot study.

Zgierska A(1), Rabago D, Zuelsdorff M, Coe C, Miller M, Fleming M.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Family Medicine (AZ, DR, MZ, MM, MF), University of
Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI; Department of
Psychology (CC), University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI; NewStart Alcohol & Drug
Treatment Program (MM), Meriter Hospital, Madison, WI.

OBJECTIVES: : Meditation is a promising treatment for alcohol dependence. This
16-week prospective case series was designed to gather preliminary data about the
efficacy of meditation for relapse prevention and to evaluate study methods
feasibility.
METHODS: : Nineteen adult alcohol-dependent graduates of an intensive outpatient 
program were enrolled. Fifteen subjects completed the 8-week meditation course
supplemented by at-home meditation and "standard of care" therapy. Outcome
measures included surveys and 2 stress-responsive biomarkers.
RESULTS: : Subjects (N = 19, 38.4 standard deviation [SD] = 8.6-year-old) were
abstinent for 30.9 (SD = 22.2) days at enrollment. Completers (N = 15) attended
82% of meditation course sessions and meditated on average 4.6 (SD = 1.1) days
per week; they were abstinent on 94.5% (SD = 7.4) of study days, with 47%
reporting complete abstinence and 47% reporting 1 or more heavy drinking days.
Their severity of depression, anxiety, stress (P < 0.05), and craving (P < 0.08),
documented relapse triggers, decreased, and the degree of mindfulness increased
(P < 0.05). The meditation course was rated as a "very important" (8.7/10, SD =
1.8) and "useful relapse prevention tool" (8.5/10, SD = 2.1); participants
reported being "very likely" to continue meditating (9.0/10, SD = 1.5). "Gaining 
skills to reduce stress," "coping with craving," and "good group support" were
the most common qualitative comments about the course value. Compared with
baseline, at 16 weeks, interleukin-6 levels decreased (N = 12, P = 0.05);
cortisol levels (N = 10) were reduced but not significantly. There were no
adverse events or side effects.
CONCLUSIONS: : Meditation may be an effective adjunctive therapy for relapse
prevention in alcohol dependence, worthy of investigation in a larger trial. The 
study methods are appropriate for such a trial.

DOI: 10.1097/ADM.0b013e31816f8546 
PMCID: PMC4106278
PMID: 21768988  [PubMed]
